Opening
-------

Hello, I'm Chris Krycho, and this is the New Rustacean podcast---a show about
learning the Rust programming language. This is *Interview 1: Sean Griffin, Part 2*.

In Part 1, Sean and I talked about his background, some of his work building the
Diesel ORM and his intent to build a Rustic web framework. Here in Part 2, we
get down into the nitty-gritty details of Rust's type system---some of its
strengths and weaknesses, and some of the things we might hope to see it do in
the future. If you're less familiar with some of the terminology, definitely
take a look at the show notes at newrustacean.com, as I've provided helpful
links with details and explanations of many of the details we get into. And now,
back into it!

...

Closing
-------
I hope you've enjoyed this first interview! Our next couple episodes will focus
on Rust's type system in general and on those pesky lifetimes we keep mentioning
but not actually talking about. We'll have more interviews on a semi-regular
basis in the future, but for now, it's back to the nitty-gritty details of
learning Rust. And keep your ears open: I have a non-trivial project I'll be
starting in Rust in the next few weeks, which should provide a lot of
interesting topics as well.

### Sponsors

Thanks to Hamza Sheikh and Chris Palmer for sponsoring the show this month!
You can see a full list of sponsors in the show notes.

If *you'd* like to support the show, you can set up recurring contributions at
Patreon.com/newrustacean, or one-off contributions at Venmo, Dwolla, or cash.me.

### Follow/support

You can find links to each of those, to the many things Sean and I talked about
on the show, and notes and more at NewRustacean.com. You can also follow the
show on Twitter @newrustacean, or follow me there @chriskrycho. You can help
*others* find the show by rating and reviewing it on iTunes, recommending it in
another podcast directory, tweeting about it, or just telling a friend!

Thanks to everyone who's added corrections and fixed typos in the show notes;
pull requests are great. I also love hearing from you! Definitely say hi on
social media, add your thoughts in the thread for the episode on the Rust user
forum at users.rust-lang.org, or shoot me an email at hello@newrustacean.com.

Until next time, happy coding!
